.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-3.0-only
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 <developer@mplx.eu>
.TH JENNIFER 1 "2026" "Jennifer" "Jennifer Programming Language"
.SH NAME
jennifer \- Jennifer programming language interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jennifer
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jennifer
is the default Jennifer interpreter, built with the standard Go
toolchain. It supports the full host-feature surface: file I/O,
external-program execution
.RB ( os.run ", " os.spawn ),
TCP/UDP sockets, DNS lookups, and the rest of the standard library.
.PP
The smaller, embeddable variant is shipped alongside as
.BR jennifer-tiny (1);
that build lacks
.B os/exec
and the network stack. Use
.B jennifer-tiny
only when binary size matters (embedded devices, minimal
container images, small-footprint scripting hosts).
.PP
Jennifer is a small, experimental, interpreted programming language.
Source files use the
.B .j
extension. The language reference and library documentation ship in
.IR /usr/share/doc/jennifer/ .
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BR run " " [\fIflags\fR] " " \fIfile.j\fR " " [\fIargs\fR...]
Execute a Jennifer source file. Pass
.B -
as the filename to read from standard input; any arguments after the file
become the program's
.BR os.ARGS .
Flags precede the file:
.B \-\-sysmoddir=\fIDIR\fR
sets the system module directory (validated when given, and exposed as
.B meta.SYSMODDIR
and by
.BR "jennifer version \-v" ),
and
.B \-I " " \fIDIR\fR
(repeatable) adds a directory to the module search path.
.TP
.BR repl
Start the interactive read-eval-print loop. Built-in line editor
with cursor keys, history, and standard editing shortcuts when stdin
is a terminal.
.TP
.BR tokens " " \fIfile.j\fR
Print the lexer's token stream for the given source file.
.TP
.BR ast " " \fIfile.j\fR
Print the parsed abstract syntax tree as JSON.
.TP
.BR fmt " " \fIfile.j\fR
Format the source file per the project style guide and print to
standard output. (No in-place rewrite.)
.TP
.BR lint " " \fIfile.j\fR...
Report patterns that are compile-legal but stylistically or
semantically suspect. Checks are grouped by concern:
.B L0nn
source errors,
.B L1nn
correctness (unused locals, dead code, empty catches, non-Error
throws, constant conditions),
.B L2nn
style (over-long or over-nested methods, over-long lines), and
.B L3nn
API lifecycle (deprecated / removed APIs).
.B \-\-checks=\fIIDS\fR
selects checks (a leading
.B !
excludes);
.B \-\-format=\fIhuman|json|github\fR
selects the output shape. Exit status is 0 when clean, 1 when there
are findings at or above the warning floor, 2 on linter failure.
Suppress in source with a
.B # lint\-disable:\fIID\fR
comment.
.TP
.BR profile " " \fIfile.j\fR
Run the program with the evaluator instrumented and write a profile
to standard output; the program's own output is redirected to
standard error.
.B \-\-allocs
profiles value-semantics copies (eager copies, COW detachments,
spawn-frame copies) instead of statement wall-clock time.
.B \-\-format=\fItable|pprof|trace\fR
selects the output shape;
.B pprof
and
.B trace
are read by
.B go tool pprof
and speedscope.app.
.TP
.BR test " " \fIfile.j\fR
Discover and run the file's test methods (the
.B test*
naming convention, or
.B \-\-filter=\fIREGEX\fR),
with optional
.B setUp
/
.B tearDown
hooks.
.B \-\-format=\fItext|tap|junit\fR
selects the report shape;
.B \-\-isolated
runs each test in a fresh interpreter subprocess. Exit status is 0
when all pass, 1 on failures, 2 on a runner error.
.TP
.BR serve " " [\fIflags\fR] " " \fIfile.j\fR
Run a Jennifer program, the same as
.BR run
(no required entry point); a program that calls
.B web.run
starts serving on the address it specifies. With
.B \-\-watch
the program runs in a child process that is restarted on any change to
the entry file, making it a live reloader for a web app or an autorun
loop for any script (Ctrl\-C stops the loop). Accepts the same
.B \-I
and
.B \-\-sysmoddir
flags as
.BR run .
.TP
.BR version " " [\fB\-v\fR]
Print the build version.
.B \-v
(or
.BR \-\-verbose )
also reports the resolved system module directory and the layers behind
it (the compile-time default and
.BR JENNIFER_SYSMODDIR ).
.TP
.BR help
Print a usage summary and exit;
.B \-h
and
.B \-\-help
are equivalent.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B JENNIFER_SYSMODDIR
System module directory for bare module imports, below a
.B \-\-sysmoddir
flag and above the compile-time default. A value that is missing or not a
directory refuses to start.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/mime/packages/jennifer.xml
Shared MIME information that registers the
.B .j
extension as
.BR text/x-jennifer .
.TP
.I /usr/share/bash-completion/completions/jennifer
Bash completion for the subcommands, their options, and
.B .j
file arguments.
.TP
.I /usr/share/vim/vimfiles/syntax/jennifer.vim
Vim/Neovim syntax highlighting for
.B .j
files (with the matching
.I ftdetect/jennifer.vim
filetype rule); on Vim's default runtime path, so it is active
without configuration.
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/jennifer/JENNIFER.md
Self-contained language reference (also usable as context for an AI
coding assistant).
.TP
.I /usr/share/jennifer/modules/
Default system module directory: Jennifer-coded library modules a distro
package installs here resolve as bare
.B import
paths. Override with
.B \-\-sysmoddir
or
.BR JENNIFER_SYSMODDIR .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR jennifer-tiny (1),
.UR https://github.com/jennifer-language/jennifer
.UE
.SH LICENSE
LGPL-3.0-only.
